1 Institutional Environment

There is a general, emerging consensus among economists that one of the most important factors for sustainable economic development is a supportive institu-tional environment. Very broadly defined, institutional environment includes factors such as political stability, governance, the macroeconomic environment, the quality of the State bureaucracy, and the general business environment with a strong emphasis on the participation and contribution of the private sector to economic growth and creation of employment.


Arguably, the private sector has the greatest potential to create value for both business and society in the area of expanding economic opportunities. Business activities can create jobs and entrepreneurial opportunities, build human capital and physical infrastructure, generate revenue for Government, and improve competitiveness in the economy. The private sector has a role to play not only by being a catalyst for economic growth and development, but also by working with Government to implement policy through PPPs.
Since independence in 1990, Namibia’s overall institutional environment has been broadly satisfactory and supportive of economic development. Perhaps the most outstanding feature of this environment is our political stability, as reflect-ed in the absence of war and conflict. Because peace has reigned in the country, Namibians can live and work in a safe and secure environment. Our democracy is flourishing, and elections at national, regional and local levels are held regular-ly in a free, fair and transparent manner. We can be proud of our Constitution, which allows for the protection of private property, amongst other things, and related laws are actively enforced. Our macroeconomic environment is the envy of many nations in the world: Namibia is in the fortunate position of having sim-ultaneous internal and external economic stability. Our internal stability is re-flected in a sustainable fiscal position and stable prices, while our external stabil-ity is reflected in a positive savings investment balance.


Due to our solid institutional underpinnings as well as excellent macroeconomic management practices, Namibia is rated favourably by a number of international agencies such as the International Monetary Fund, World Bank, Transparency International, and the Heritage Foundation. Namibia is one of very few African countries that have both Fitch and Moody investment credit ratings, and Namib-ia’s debut issue of a Eurobond in 2011 was well received. The recent reclassifica-tion of Namibia as an upper-middle-income country is yet another indication of our country’s successful macroeconomic performance.


Despite sound policies overall, a number of challenges in the institutional envi-ronment remain, as outlined below. These have been given attention in the NDP4 in order to unleash Namibia’s full growth potential.

Environmental management

The Republic of Namibia accords high priority to environmental protection for sustainable development, hence it has adopted a number of policies since 1990 to manage and preserve the environment. It recognizes that environmental management is both an enabler and driver of economic development. The issue of environmental management is firmly anchored in Namibian laws and policies whose roots are in the Namibian Constitution and has earned the country an excellent reputation internationally for prudent environmental management based on innovative and progressive legislative framework.

The Namibian Constitution states that we must maintain our ecosystems, essen-tial ecological processes and biological diversity of Namibia and utilize our living natural resources in a sustainable manner for the benefit of all Namibian, both present and future.

The environmental challenges in Namibia include, freshwater scarcity, land deg-radation, deforestation, unsustainable use of coastal and marine resources, and vulnerability to climate change.


Macroeconomic stability

While we currently have macroeconomic stability, the recent increase in Govern-ment debt levels has shifted the focus to policies that increase revenue and curb increases in expenditure in order to ensure fiscal sustainability. During the time of the global economic crisis, the Namibian Government deliberately utilised its fiscal space to stimulate economic activity in a counter-cyclical manner. Over this period and subsequently however, the government has remained committed to fiscal discipline. This will maintain market confidence, ensure sustained econom-ic growth, and create fiscal space for potential exogenous shocks. As a small, open economy, Namibia’s economic performance is inextricably linked to its global counterpart. Therefore, the Government needs to be prepared for exter-nal shocks that could potentially hamper economic growth.

Government revenues have been a concern for some time now. Challenges es-sentially emanate from three factors: a shallow revenue base, notwithstanding the introduction of new revenue streams; weaknesses in the collection process; and an over-reliance on Southern African Customs Union receipts, which are projected to diminish in the near future due to ongoing trade liberalisation initia-tives. On the Government expenditure side, the wage bill, which has ballooned over the past few years, is a matter of concern. Moreover, the economy faces substantial downside risks emanating from the deteriorating global environ-ment, putting additional pressure on fiscal sustainability. These factors will all be carefully monitored during the NDP4 cycle, and policy will be attuned according-ly through an appropriate mix of fiscal and monetary policy responses.


The business environment

We have a stable macroeconomic environment, however, necessary reforms in order to make the business environment more dynamic and improve our growth trajectory have either not been embarked upon, or not implemented successful-ly. This disconnect is reflected in international surveys on competitiveness that score Namibia relatively highly on institutional and macro issues, but poorly with respect to micro issues.
Challenges relating to the business environment can be broadly categorised as those facing start-up firms and those facing existing businesses, especially micro, small- and medium-scale enterprises (MSMEs). Under each of these two broad categories, a number of issues need attention. These issues often cut across all existing businesses, and include the following:

Ease of doing business in Namibia.

Access to finance and land.

Access to skills.

R&D and innovation.

Labour flexibility and productivity.

Public service delivery.

Unemployment.

Public and private sector cooperation.

The Government incentive regime.

Ease of doing business

Regarding the ease of doing business in Namibia, the critical issues are the num-ber of days and the number of procedures it takes to register a business com-pared with competitor economies. According to the latest World Bank report on doing business worldwide, it takes 66 days and 10 procedures to set up a new business in Namibia, while average figures for Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries are 5 days and 12 procedures re-spectively. In sub-Saharan Africa, Rwanda tops the list as the easiest country to set up a new business, with only two days and three procedures required. Fur-thermore, registering property, paying taxes and trading across borders are comparatively difficult in Namibia, according to the report.


Access to finance

Access to finance for enterprises remains a key challenge, particularly for start-ups and for micro and small-scale enterprises. High bank user charges and fees, high transaction costs, low levels of financial literacy, and, partly, a lack of appro-priate and innovative finance products (e.g. microfinance) and instruments (e.g. venture capital, bridging finance) are key factors limiting access to finance. In addition to these, small- and medium-scale enterprises often lack the necessary collateral to qualify for bank loans. This implies that MSMEs are unable to buy equipment to invest in or expand their businesses in order to produce more goods and services, and to employ more people. Their source of capital for ex-pansion is often limited to profit and inputs from family and friends.


Access to land

Access to serviced land is yet another inhibiting factor for existing and new busi-nesses alike. Issues with regard to availability, affordability, tenure and delivery affect the current dynamics of urbanisation and business development. The greatest bottleneck is the non-availability of serviced land in towns, villages and settlement areas, as well as communal land. The processes required to deliver land according to the requirements of the Townships and Division of Land Amendment Act, 1992 [No. 28 of 1992] is lengthy due to a serious lack of registered town planners and surveyors. In particular, micro and small-scale business-es struggle with land registration and the non-collateralisation of existing land rights in communal and non-formalised urban areas. Land administration pro-cesses are based on outdated legislation and regulations. The result is that land markets are distorted and land becomes expensive and often unaffordable.

Access to skills

Limited access to quality skills and a mismatch in the supply of and demand for skills persist as severe constraints in the Namibian economy, preventing the country from achieving a higher growth rate. The sources of this problem are numerable, but include the education system as well as in vocational and other training. Furthermore, labour market regulations are partly responsible for an inflexible labour market. Also, it remains challenging for industry to import skills where local skills are unavailable. Given the importance of skills in the different sectors of the economy, there is a need to focus more attention on the develop-ment of skills to support industry.

R&D and innovation

R&D and innovation – which entail the commercially successful introduction or implementation of a new or improved product or process – are at a fairly low ebb in Namibia. Innovative products and processes are essential for companies to participate in markets and to sustain competitiveness. The interaction be-tween key actors – the State, research institutions and the private sector – in respect of innovation is minimal, while incentives for targeted R&D in respect of introducing new technology and promoting innovation are non-existent.

Labour

Less than desirable levels of labour flexibility and productivity negatively affect the competitiveness of Namibian businesses. One of the most cited issues in this regard is the current labour law, which is inflexible in terms of working hours, impacting on a number of industries with abnormal working hours, such as the hospitality and services industry. Laying off workers is very challenging and, con-sequently, companies are reluctant to hire additional permanent staff. Further-more, the current labour law is generous with respect to leave days such as an-nual leave, sick leave and compassionate leave. When added to public holidays, this presents a substantial loss of productive time. Another factor, is that labour productivity in Namibia is low. In a globalised and competitive world, productivi-ty is essential; hence, more should be done to measure and increase productivity in Namibia under the NDP4.

Public service delivery

Public service delivery in Namibia also needs to be efficient and effective. De-spite significant progress in establishing a fully functioning bureaucracy, there are major concerns about the delivery capacity of certain State functions. These impede our ability to provide the range of goods and services required by our citizens. The ability of the public sector to deliver on its mandate efficiently and effectively is a prerequisite for rapid growth, job creation, and poverty reduc-tion. Moreover, the pace at which we implement developmental programmes is unsatisfactory. Sadly, public sector weaknesses in respect of delivering services often affect the most vulnerable in our society. This weak delivery capacity
stems from a number of factors, but the severe deficit of skills at critical man-agement levels in the State apparatus is the most telling. We have not succeed-ed in attracting or retaining critical talent to manage the day-to-day operations of the State, and therefore there is a need to continue improving professional-ism, performance management, transparency, and accountability at all levels in the system. We also do not have a clear sense of where the next generation of bureaucrats will come from, and what specialist skills will be needed for the effi-cient running of the bureaucratic system. Therefore, we need to significantly strengthen the managerial and leadership capabilities of our senior civil serv-ants. While Namibia is seen as one of the “cleanest countries” in Africa, accord-ing to Transparency International, there is a concern that corruption is on the rise. Finally, the current public tender system is regarded as being non-transparent, too cumbersome, and difficult to access, in particular for MSMEs.
Public and private sector cooperation

Public and private sector cooperation is a key success factor when it comes to rapid economic growth. For example, business membership organisations that provide a representative opinion of issues that require action by the public sec-tor play an important role in a country’s development. Currently, not all busi-nesses are represented by or organised into formal bodies, particularly micro and small-scale enterprises from the Regions. Thus, they have no avenue by means of which to advocate public sector reform in public–private dialogue. Even some of the established private sector associations have insufficient capaci-ty to effectively engage Government. Moreover, the Government is not able to satisfy all the population’s needs and expectations. It can often be difficult to satisfy the citizens’ basic needs such as ensuring a sufficient food supply and good health services, providing adequate basic education and a sense of securi-ty, and protecting the environment for future generations. Government’s dimin-ished ability to engage the private sector cooperatively may be related to issues of limited efficiency, but the reasons may also be financial. Some of the SOEs run huge budget deficits, and are still not able to deliver the goods and services to citizens at affordable prices.

Incentive regime

Furthermore, there is concern about the general incentive regime in Namibia. Many point out that it is not always clear and transparent, particularly for manu-facturers. The current incentive structure is perceived to be overly generous, complex, and vulnerable to abuse, e.g. by way of transfer pricing, financial trans-fers, mischaracterisation of business activities, churning ‘new’ businesses to qualify for incentives, and the potential for corruption in the granting of incen-tives. In addition, the reliance on highly selective, uncertain and discretionary criteria to qualify for manufacturing incentives works against market efficiency and complicates tax administration.
Based on the above analysis of the current situation and the challenges in the institutional environment, the following desired outcome is proposed under the NDP4:
By the year 2017, Namibia is the most competitive economy in the SADC region, according to the standards set by the World Economic Forum.

In respect of competitiveness and efficiency, one of the strategic initiatives to be undertaken during the NDP4 phase will be the continuous reform of the busi-ness environment. Issues to be investigated and acted upon during this phase will include the cost, time and number of procedures required to open a busi-ness, as well as the investment incentives and measures needed to increase the competitiveness of micro and small-scale enterprises.


Environmental management

The environmental strategy during NDP4 and beyond will include: the imple-mentation and enforcement of the Environmental Management Act of 2007, particularly the use of strategic environmental assessments to guide develop-ment decision-making, the development of an integrated (including spatial) plan-ning, the implementation of the CBNRM programme; improving and implemen-tation policy and legislative frameworks, increase public access to environmental information; strengthen inter-ministerial, nongovernmental, donor coordination and harmonization, adopt Public-Private-Community-Partnerships and; develop new initiatives such as Natural Resources and Environmental Governance Pro-gram.

Access to finance

Regarding access to finance, especially for start-ups, the overall strategy will be to support the implementation of the NFSS. Among other things, the NFSS aims to:
increase the resilience of the Namibian financial system to various types of shocks.

deepen the financial sector by introducing new instruments, including risk capital.

increase access to finance for small- and medium-scale enterprises (SMEs) and the general public.

significantly enhance consumer financial literacy.


Access to land

Regarding access to land for business, the strategy will be to speed up the re-view of outdated legislation pertaining to land delivery and registration so that the procedures will allow for speedy acquisition and ownership of land for busi-ness and housing development. Moreover, Government will expedite its Land Reform Programme to enable more previously disadvantaged Namibians to own land in commercial areas, and for communal land rights to be used as collateral for business transactions.

Availability of skills

Regarding the skills deficit, the short-term strategy will be to identify the critical skills needed for industries to operate at a higher output potential. If not availa-ble in the domestic market, these skills will be imported. Such importation will be streamlined and facilitated, in collaboration with the ongoing initiatives by the Namibia Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Chamber of Mines, the Namibia Investment Centre, and the Ministry of Home Affairs and Immigration. In the longer term, and starting under the NDP4, skills-building will be enhanced and prioritised. Further skills development in the public and private sectors will be addressed through the provision of capacity-building initiatives and on-the-job as well as other training. In this regard, the recently established Namibia Training Authority (NTA) will play a lead role and will table proposals and actions in the first year of the NDP4’s implementation.

R&D and innovation

As a nation, we are obliged to be forward-looking. Therefore, the NDP4 will have a strong R&D and innovation component. Companies will be encouraged to adapt new technologies and invest in R&D. Current R&D efforts will be analysed, and platforms will be established for cooperation between the public and pri-vate sectors as well as with tertiary education institutions. The broader strategy will be to elevate innovation to a national level, with representation at all stages of the innovation process.

Labour flexibility

Regarding the labour market, the overarching strategy under the NDP4 will be to introduce more flexibility while protecting the rights of workers. Temporary ex-emption from compliance with certain sections of the Labour Act, 2007, will be considered in the interests of rapid job creation. The details will be worked out collaboratively between the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare, the various labour unions, and the Employers’ Federation, before the end of the first year of the NDP4 cycle.

Public service delivery

In respect of public service delivery, the strategies and actions to be pursued will include the following:

Review of the Public Service Act, 1995, to streamline disciplinary process-es

Introduction and enforcement of performance management across all levels agencies and functions of Government

Continued focus on building and strengthening of specialised skills, partic-ularly in project management and leadership

Positioning of the civil service to become an employer of choice that is able to compete head-on with the private sector for skills and talent, and

Review of the role of the Public Service Commission to make it easier for the State to compete with the private sector for specialist skills.

An overall assessment of the public service will also need to be undertaken to determine what its optimal size should be, taking efficient and effective delivery into account. The purpose of public sector reform is to ensure effective, efficient and economically sound service delivery to the citizens of a country, and thereby contribute towards the promotion of that society’s general welfare. It is general-ly accepted that successful and sustainable economic reform cannot take place without a competent public sector.


Public and private sector cooperation

With regard to public–private partnerships, the Government will establish an institutionalised public–private dialogue platform. Frequent meetings will be arranged through workshops, investment planning sessions, and information briefings. This dialogue will enable both the public and the private sector to in-vest in various industries in the economy in order to accelerate growth and job creation. The platform will not only facilitate private sector participation, but it will also support Government’s efforts to expand the provision of goods and ser-vices, enhance the extension of business loans, establish additional economic infrastructure, and broaden the development of skills according to capabilities, areas of expertise, and interests.


Incentive regime

During the NDP4 phase, the current incentive regime will be reviewed in order to streamline it and effectively respond to industry development as targeted. The incentive regime will not necessarily only be tax-based, but will consider broader support measures as well, as a carrot-and-stick approach to entice in-dustries to develop in a particular direction.


Good governance

The Government is also required to be fully committed to addressing corruption at all levels. In this regard, the Anti-Corruption Commission, in liaison with ex-isting structures such as the Namibian Police, the courts, the Ombudsman, and Parliament, should forcefully deal with corruption with a view to root it out. In addition, institutions within the public and private sectors should constantly be encouraged to adhere to the principles of good corporate governance. Moreo-ver, a code of ethical conduct should be set up as regards service delivery, which emphasises adherence to the principles of good corporate governance, in-creased transparency, openness, accountability and increased participation by citizens in order to prevent and expose corrupt practices.



Table 16 (page 42) shows some challenges that obtain in respect of the institu-tional environment at the beginning of the NDP4 cycle, the implications of not addressing them, and the strategy proposed to mitigate them.

*****

2 Education

Since independence in 1990, Namibia has invested significantly in the education sector. Education has, in fact, received the lion’s share of the National Budget almost every year. Despite this, there is broad consensus in Namibia that the education system remains weak by international standards, and requires signifi-cant intervention as a primary priority for the future of the country. This view is supported by many businesses and industries (>>) as well as a number of top politicians and Government officials, including the President, the Prime Minister and the Minister of Education (>>).


The problems associated with the education system are extensive, and range from a lack of quality to a lack of infrastructure and information and communica-tion technology (ICT). While some advances have been seen over the past 21 years, these have been limited. Many regard them as inadequate, in that they have not given the system the reform it has sought. Since education, as with any training, is a direct skills transfer, it is critical that those with the immense re-sponsibility of educating the nation, and of ensuring that skills are efficiently transferred, are in fact equipped to do so.


One great challenge associated with education is the fact that it is a long-term investment, with results rarely seen overnight. Education requires continued outlay in both money and time and, thus, remains a public and private cost that is unlikely to disappear or dissipate over time. As such, it is important to ensure that we achieve the intended returns on these investments, so that this expendi-ture requirement remains manageable and its yields positive.


A number of challenges have been identified in the education system, but these can be broadly grouped into two overarching categories, namely quality in the system across all layers and segments, and the mismatch between the demand for and supply of skills in the country.


Since independence, the Namibian education system has often failed to deliver quality in its graduates. Issues surrounding the quality of education provision persist at practically every level and in almost every type of training institution. Passing standards are generally low, and the knowledge required to achieve the-se marks is often considered insufficient by global standards. Southern African Consortium for Monitoring Education Quality (SACMEQ) results show that Na-mibia spends significantly on education; however, the returns on its investment in the form of marks attained remain relatively low. Clearly, therefore, current and projected future demand for skills is poorly catered for by educational insti-tutions.


The challenges relating to the quality of education start with the limited access to early childhood development (ECD) services. ECD refers to the growth and change that take place from preconception until the age of 6. In these early years, the most critical neurological development takes place, with the most significant brain growth occurring in the first three years of life. As at 2012, there are no Government-owned ECD centres in the country. There are no legal regu-lations for ECD centres; there are few qualified teachers/educarers trained in ECD; and there is a severe undervaluation of ECD-trained individuals – leading to underpayment and limited incentive to work in this field. ECD is generally under-valued and often misunderstood. Moreover, investment in ECD is low – although the potential returns of quality ECD have been shown to be very high.


Similarly, numeracy and literacy tests by bodies such as SACMEQ illustrate that, while investment in primary education is relatively high in Namibia, quality out-comes remain a problem. Thus, getting value for money by way of the efficient use of resources continues to present a challenge.


Senior secondary is the last step in the formal school education process before students enrol for tertiary education or enter the workforce. A Grade 10 qualifi-cation is generally considered to be insufficient to enter skilled employment. Currently, however, an insufficient number of students obtain their Grade 12 qualification for a number of reasons, including a lack of space at upper second-ary level, non-achievement of a Grade 10 pass, and the legacy of substandard education at lower levels. However, if the Grade 10 pass rate were to increase dramatically, serious capacity constraints at Grade 12 level would be exposed. Hence, while efforts aimed at improving the Grade 10 pass rate should continue, additional capacity should simultaneously be developed in Grades 11 and 12 to accommodate more students at those levels.


The provision of vocational and technical education remains another serious challenge in Namibia. The perception of vocational and technical education as being a second-rate alternative to a purely academic tertiary education is inaccu-rate and unfounded. While the number of VET and community skills develop-ment centres gradually increased under the NDP3, quality remains a concern and will be addressed under the NDP4. Furthermore, there are simply an insuffi-cient number of private vocational or technical centres in the country.


R&D, too, is underdeveloped in Namibia, with few institutions carrying out R&D on a significant scale, resulting in low levels of product development. Moreover, there is limited tracking of funds spent on R&D in the country. Conversely, for example, our neighbours Botswana and South Africa spend approximately 0.5 and 0.9%, respectively, of GDP on R&D.
Based on the above analysis of the current situation and the challenges we face in education and skills development, the following desired outcome under the NDP4 is proposed:
Namibia is characterised by a high-quality and internationally recognised education system that capacitates the population to meet current and future market demands for skills and innovation. By 2017, we see an in-crease from the 2011 level of 17.9% to 25.0% in respect of Grade 10 stu-dents achieving a pass mark (30 points overall, and at least an F for Eng-lish). We also see an increase from the 2011 level of 29.5% to 45.0% in respect of students receiving a mark of at least 25 points overall at Grade 12 level.
In line with the two key challenges, strategies and actions in the education sys-tem will be designed around improving quality and addressing the mismatch between the demand for and supply of skills.
With regard to general quality improvement, the strategies and activities to be pursued will include –

	improved learning standards and curricular development

	teacher development

	improved availability of textbooks and materials

	improved stringent learner assessment

	improved hard and soft infrastructure, and improved alignment between market demand and institutional supply by ensuring that curricula are de-signed with input from employers.


One key aspect across all levels of education is the quality of skills in those who are engaged in the business of transferring knowledge. To this end, stringent standards for teachers should be set and adherence to them monitored. Fur-thermore, in order to attract educators of a high standard to the profession, it is critical to address negative perceptions that there are those whose poor achievements, especially in science subjects, use the teaching profession as a fallback position. Therefore, there is a need to improve the career prospects for educators whose standards are consistently high. Such enhancements will pro-vide the required incentive for educators to remain in the profession. Further-more, the entry requirements for teacher training courses should be more strin-gent to ensure that teaching standards are kept high by new entrants to the pro-fession, and that becoming a teacher is not a career of last resort.


One of the key focus areas under the NDP4, as indicated by DO2, will be a signifi-cant increase in the percentage of children that meet the entry requirement for VET and other tertiary institutions. In this regard, elements of the strategic focus will include –

	increasing the availability of opportunities and places in senior secondary education

	improving the conditions of service for teachers as well as the quality of the education they need to provide in the secondary phase, and

	improving the availability of secondary education textbooks and other teaching and learning materials.


Regarding the alignment of demand and supply, based on the Human Resources Development Plan, key areas of skills shortages will be identified and targeted for development over the next five years, with specific strategies that will in-clude the following components:

	Linking VET as well as technical education in general to envisaged priority areas, starting off with tourism, logistics, mining, and manufacturing

	Increasing the provision of opportunities for VET and technical education, targeting the entire country, but impoverished areas in particular

	Introducing competency-based education and training

	Upgrading educator qualifications and expand throughputs of students undertaking studies to become educators.

	Providing adequate equipment and infrastructure for VET centres, and

	Certifying acquired skills in the informal sector.

Quality outcomes will not be confined to secondary education and VET: strate-gies to improve the quality of education at earlier stages will also be pursued. One such strategy will be the promotion of ECD as follows:

	Provision of 100 free, Government-run, strategically located ECD centres by 2017, focusing on the poorest sections of society

	Increased provision of and support for ECD teacher training, and

	Increased ministerial capacity to implement and support ECD centres.


In order to better integrate ECD with other aspects of education, it is recom-mended that the responsibility for ECD is transferred from the Ministry of Gen-der Equality and Child Welfare to the Ministry of Education.


Regarding pre-primary education, the strategy will be built around the following components:

	Increased availability of pre-primary and primary education

	Increased focus on quality, particularly as regards numeracy and literacy,

	Improved efficiency in the use of resources, focusing on value for money.


Senior secondary education improvements are in turn partly founded on the quality of improvements in the early stages of the education process. As such, all strategies to improve the earlier phases also speak to the overall strategies for enhancing the quality of senior secondary education.

In order to fast-track students of exceptional academic ability, it is recommend-ed that centres of excellence accessible to all, with exceptionally high standards and requirements, be developed in the fields of mathematics, science and lan-guages.

In order to increase graduates’ employability, internships and apprenticeships will be promoted to assist them in finding full-time employment.

In order to increase the volume and quality of R&D in the country, it is important to increase spending on R&D to at least 0.3% of GDP by 2017.

While the Ministry of Education has the entrenched mandate to develop the country’s education system, practically every member of society – particularly industries and non-governmental organisations – will have a role to play in its improvement. Nonetheless, the task of coordinating educational institutions, O/ M/As, industries and other private sector businesses, so that they may play their required role in education, will continue to be the exclusive domain of the Minis-try of Education. Internal M&E also falls to this Ministry, with higher-level M&E being carried out by NPC and the Office of the Prime Minister.

*****

3 Health


A healthy population is an end in itself and one of the basic requirements for quality of life. Furthermore, a healthy population is one of the core foundations for economic growth and development, helping to increase worker productivity and investment as well as reap the benefits of investments in education.


Vision 2030 outlines a vision for a healthy, food-secure and breastfeeding nation, in which all preventable, infectious and parasitic diseases are under secure con-trol and in which people enjoy a high standard of living, with access to quality health services.

Table 21 summarises the health sector’s performance under the NDP3 in terms of the set primary health targets.

Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 births).
Number of people with advanced HIV infection receiving anti-retroviral therapy.
Malaria mortality (per 100,000 population).
Population with sustainable access to safe water (%).
Population with access to improved sanitation (%).

HIV prevalence among pregnant women (%).

As can be seen, performance on the whole has been encouraging, especially in relation to the high-level outcome targets such as life expectancy, infant mortali-ty, and malaria mortality. HIV prevalence among pregnant women has also fallen since the highs of 2000, although the percentage for 2010 is still considerable at 18.8%.

Health remains a top Government priority, as demonstrated by the fact that the Ministry of Health and Social Services received the fourth largest share of the National Budget in 2010/11, after the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Fi-nance, and the Ministry of Defence. However, spending on health is still low by global standards, at an estimated US$284 per head for total health spending in 2008, i.e. 6.9% of GDP. According to the WHO World Health Statistics (2011) sev-eral other southern African countries – including Botswana (7.6%), Malawi (9.1%) and South Africa (8.2%) – spend more, both in absolute terms and as a proportion of GDP.

However, spending on health has led to an improvement in terms of outputs to improve health, such as the establishment of a Medical School and a Cardiology Unit at Windhoek’s State Hospital, an increased number of births attended by skilled health professionals, and improved ART and immunisation coverage. The-se outputs have had a noticeable impact on outcomes, although there is still sig-nificant scope for improvement. For example, life expectancy and maternal mor-tality both improved over NDP3, but are now only at the same levels as at inde-pendence. Life expectancy fell from 60, in 1990, to around 53 in 2000, but has since returned to around 60. Similarly, maternal mortality increased from 180 per 100,000 births in 1990 to 220 in 2000, before improving again to around 180 in recent years. Furthermore, the prevalence of tuberculosis has been increas-ing over recent years, and the prevalence of HIV and AIDS in general remains unacceptably high.

There are a wide range of broad challenges which impact on health outcomes, both within the health sector and in other sectors; factors such as malnutrition, sanitation, education, infrastructure and poverty. For example, stunting, largely due to malnutrition, is a major issue in Namibia, affecting around 30% of under 5s in Namibia. These challenges are addressed in other parts of the plan but it is important to bear in mind the impact that improvements in these areas will have on health.

Health financing

One of the main challenges to improving health outcomes in Namibia over the NDP4 period is that of health financing. Firstly, a reduction of donor support (largely as a result of Namibia’s reclassification as an ‘upper -middle income’ country) will occur during the duration of the NDP period. The reduction in do-nor support will impact on both funding levels and technical capacity to deliver effective health services. This is compounded by the fact that the Government is aiming at fiscal consolidation towards the end of the budget period (2014/15). A further finance challenge is that of the efficient use of resources, through appro-priate resource allocation and value for money of service delivery. It is worth noting that the reduced levels of donor support, whilst a threat to the provision of vital health services, could also represent an opportunity in that coordination may be easier with a smaller number of stakeholders. Thus there is an oppor-tunity to strengthen national capacity of coordination at all levels.

Access to health services

Another main category of challenge is that of access to health services. Access is difficult due to the sparsely distributed population of Namibia, which makes it difficult to not only provide health service, but also adds additional transport costs to those who want to access services. These extra transport costs are a particularly difficult barrier for those in poverty. Infrastructure, such as the road network and power supply, also impacts on access to key health services. A broader challenge relating to the access and use of health services is that of cul-ture; cultural factors often influence the populations decision to use health services or not, for example, whether to have a baby in a hospital or at home in the village or whether to take or reject ART. In terms of affordability as a constraint to access, the exemptions of vulnerable persons from paying fees should be ade-quately enforced.

Availability of health professionals

Another broad challenge relating to improved health outcomes is the availability of key health professionals. This relates not only to the miss-match of the supply and demand for skills in the health sector, but also attracting and retaining hu-man resource for health in the public sector.


Governance

Governance is also a challenge in the health sector in Namibia. Partnership and coordination between the main stakeholders in the health sector is not being carried out adequately. Improved Governance would help enhance delivery across private, public and NGO providers. Accountability is another issue that requires attention as the level of infrastructure and service provision is often reported as being inadequate.


HIV/AIDS and TB

Certain diseases remain a key barrier for progress on morbidity and mortality in Namibia. Both communicable and non-communicable diseases are at unaccepta-bly high levels. In particular, HIV/AIDS remains one of the fundamental challeng-es, and the high prevalence has a devastating effect on not only overall mortality but also maternal/child mortality rates. Given limited resources, the Govern-ment should target key epidemic drivers and most at risk population groups. Another cause for concern is the prevalence of TB, which has only shown a mar-ginal decrease over the last 10 years. TB prevalence per 100,000 people in-creased from 657 in 2000 to 822 in 2004 but has since fallen to 565 in 2010. Of particular challenge is the high TB/HIV co-infection rate and the emergence of drug resistant TB.


Based on the above developments and challenges, Government aims at achiev-ing the following desired outcome by the year 2017:

By 2017, Namibians have access to a quality health system, both in terms of prevention, cure, and rehabilitation, characterised by an improvement in healthy adjusted life expectancy (HALE) from baseline of 57 (2011) to 59 in 2017 (according to the World Health Organisation).


The drivers of health outcomes are multifaceted and include factors such as in-come, sanitation, education and health service provision. It is important to rec-ognise the need for multi-sectoral approach that include not only the health sec-tor, but also improvements in poverty, education, sanitation, food security (through agriculture) and infrastructure.


Health financing

Strategies will focus on the size, allocation and use of resources. Innovative funding mechanisms should be used to increase total amount of resources allo-cated to the health sector and make up for reduced donor support. Such mecha-nisms could include the private sector, other Ministries (not simply health) or new revenue streams. The allocation and use of resources could be improved through use of PPPs where appropriate, to outsource health services to the most effective and efficient provider.


Ensuring an adequate supply of skilled medical health professionals

The strategic interventions will focus on retention of staff, attracting new staff (and re-attracting health professionals who have left) and training staff in key priority areas. As highlighted in the skills chapter, the skills miss-match in Namib-ia is a big problem and this is also true in health sector. Therefore training and attracting skills should relate to priority areas of demand.


Improved governance

To improve Governance in the health sector the legal and regulatory framework (<<) will be revised. Furthermore, coordination and partnership across all rele-vant stakeholders will be pursued, at national and regional Government level as well as public, private and NGO service providers. Accountability will also be im-proved to ensure service delivery in the sector.


Access to health facilities

To improve access to health services the focus will be on distance, affordability and acceptance. Distance relates to the need for innovative service delivery to ensure universal access, especially in rural areas. Appropriate construction of health infrastructure is also a key component in the delivery of health services. Affordability relates to the need to not only have affordable services (which is covered under the user fee policy and medical aid schemes) but also to ensure those in need can reach the clinics, health centres and district hospitals (transport costs). This aspect is very much related to poverty levels and overlaps with the strategies in the poverty chapter of the plan. Acceptance of services is another important component in the use of health services; it is important to foster a culture of health service use, so that people recognise the need to ac-cess.

A reduction in morbidity and mortality

Key diseases, particularly the most damaging communicable and non-communicable diseases, such as lifestyle diseases will be focused on. Emphasis will be placed on targeting the root causes of disease prevalence, such as life-style factors, rather than simply treatment.

*****

4 Extreme poverty

Namibia continues to be characterised by poverty in the midst of plenty re-sources, despite the Poverty Reduction Strategy and the Poverty Reduction Ac-tion Programme in place for a decade, which tackle inequality and poverty from various angles. Substantial budgetary allocations to the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health and Social Services have aimed at forming a well-educated and healthy population with choices in life. As described in the respec-tive NDP4 Chapters, outcomes have not always met the high expectations, how-ever. At the same time, Government has pursued macroeconomic stability, in-cluding fiscal discipline, in order to create an attractive environment for domes-tic and foreign direct investment that will create employment opportunities for school-leavers and migrants from Namibia’s rural areas. Substantial investment in infrastructure – from transport and water to electricity and telecommunica-tions – has supported the drive to establish an environment that would enable the private sector to flourish. Nonetheless, Government has been aware that these policies will not immediately create the number of decent jobs and income needed to improve the standard of living for all. Government has, therefore, ex-panded the social protection system to prevent and alleviate poverty and vulner-ability.


The social protection system comprises benefits from a contributory social secu-rity scheme consisting of maternity leave, sick leave, and once-off death and dis-ability payments. While the contributions as a share of gross salary have re-mained stable, benefits have been increased since the system’s inception.


In addition, Government has introduced a progressive tax system, in which tax rates increase according to taxable income. A tax threshold exempts low -income earners from having to pay income tax. This threshold has been adjusted upward to account for inflationary salary increments.


While these measures provide low-income earners with some kind of protection, they benefit the formal labour market only – i.e. not the large number of infor-mal sector employees or the unemployed. Besides the contributory social safety net, Namibia is one of only a few African countries that provide non-contributory social grants to some of the vulnerable in society, namely pensioners, people living with disabilities, and orphans and vulnerable children (OVC). Coverage of the old age grant for people above 60 years of age has increased to 91% of eligi-ble persons, while the number of persons benefiting from the Maintenance Grant (MG) was in excess of 117,000 during the NDP3 period. Coverage of the Foster Care Grant (FCG) and the grant for people living with disabilities, howev-er, has trailed behind targets. These interventions are aimed at those in society who are most vulnerable and severely affected by extreme poverty. While 13.8% of all households were classified as severely poor in 2003/4, the proportion of severely poor households reached as high as 23% when it came to the subcate-gory of households headed by 60+-year-olds, and reached to around 14% for households where the head was between the ages of 16 and 20.


Furthermore, households with orphans (21.1 per cent) or children (17.7 per cent) were more often affected by severe poverty than those without children (3.9 per cent) or without orphans (11.7 per cent).


In spite of these challenges, Namibia has made progress concerning equality and poverty. The Gini coefficient declined from 0.60 (2003/4) to 0.58 (2009/10), de-spite increasing unemployment during the same period. Based on the 2009/10 Namibia Household Income and Expenditure Survey, poverty levels dropped as well. Some 10.3% of all households are now classified as severely poor com-pared with 13.8% in 2003/4. The proportion of the total population that are clas-sified as severely poor, however, reaches 15.8%, since poorer households tend to have more children. However, certain household categories and individuals remain more prone to poverty than others, such as people living in rural areas in general, and women and children in particular. The child poverty rate declined from 43.5% in 2003/4 to 34.4% in 2009/10, but it has remained considerably above the general poverty rate. This indicates that children are at a higher pov-erty risk than adults.

Despite the various Government interventions, a number of challenges remain in respect of increasing equality and addressing extreme poverty, as Table 25 (page 84) illustrates. The gap between the poorest and the richest income groups has only narrowed marginally. Similarly, the share of total income received by the poorest 15% has only increased slightly, although the improvement in the Gini coefficient from 0.60 to 0.58 over the same period would have suggested other-wise.


The coverage of the various grants has increased. However, eligible persons often struggle to access these grants because of a lack of the required docu-ments. There is a need to speed up the process of civil registration. The issuance of birth certificates at hospitals has resulted in a substantial increase in regis-tered births, and can largely explain the increase in the number of child welfare beneficiaries. However, legal obstacles remain, and this calls for a thorough re-view of the legislation regulating birth, marriage and death certificates.


Access to social grants, especially to the FCG, is hampered not only by the back-log in civil registration, but also by statutory requirements. The limited number of social workers in the country that investigate and verify all applications for FCGs is the largest constraint in the grant approval process. Furthermore, some 95% of FCG applicants are actually extended family members who are not eligi-ble for the MG and, hence, have to follow the more cumbersome procedures for the FCG. The introduction of a Kinship Grant, which would subsume some of the FCG applicants, would reduce the investigative and statutory work and free so-cial workers of excessive administration so that they can focus on a wider range of child protection issues

The major drawback of the current FCG and MG schemes is that a large number of vulnerable children are excluded, namely children being taken care of by im-poverished parents. This has significant implications for the children’s well-being, and results in malnutrition that can lead to stunted growth, reduced learning abilities, and in turn, the perpetuation of poverty. The gradual expan-sion of the grant system to include all children, starting with newborns, can sig-nificantly contribute to household food security, adequate nutrition and, eventu-ally, to healthy and well-educated children.


Two of the social grants are income-based and include means testing, namely the MG and the War Veterans’ Grant. The thresholds for these two grants are set at N$200 and N$2,200 per month, respectively. The cost-effectiveness of means testing is questionable, since its administration is usually expensive. Fur-thermore, means testing distracts officials and social workers from more rele-vant and urgent matters and is challenging to enforce in large, informal econo-mies. Furthermore, since means testing places discretionary powers with offi-cials, it can increase the likelihood of corruption. Placing an income threshold on access to social grants can also act as a disincentive for beneficiaries or appli-cants in respect of seeking salary increments or better-remunerated jobs. It is recommended, therefore, that means testing for the MG or the recommended Kinship Grant be reconsidered; alternatively, the threshold could be adjusted to the current level of the War Veterans’ Grant.


A study on the effectiveness of the FCG and MG has revealed that food was the main expenditure item for 42% of beneficiaries, followed by school fees for 35% of beneficiaries (>>). Abolishing contributions to the School Development Fund, for example, and hence, making education free(r) for all, will allow poor house-holds to spend what little they have on necessities such as food, clothing, hy-giene and health.


While the coverage of the various grants has increased in part, grant amounts have been adjusted irregularly (e.g. only old age and war veterans’ grants) or not at all for several years (the FCG and MG). Thus, the real value of the grants has declined, owing to inflation, and has resulted in beneficiaries not being able to maintain their standard of living. Moreover, since better-off households usually receive inflation-adjusted income, the income gap between them and grant re-cipients could widen. This can explain why households with orphans or those relying on pensions as their main sources of income have much higher incidenc-es of poverty than other households do. There is a need, therefore, to introduce an inflation -indexed or public-sector-salary-increment-indexed social grant scheme that ensures beneficiaries can maintain or even improve their standard of living. Furthermore, since the consumption basket of poor households differs substantially from that of the average Namibian household, an inflation rate for the lowest income group should be calculated in order to determine the degree to which social grants should be adjusted for inflation.


Table 25 (overleaf) indicates the performance during NDP3 in terms of set pov-erty and inequality indicators.

While cash transfers – whether as remittances, social grants or in other forms – have proved to be effective in addressing poverty to some extent, supplemen-tary measures are needed to enable people living in impoverished conditions and benefiting from social grants to climb up from this lowest rung of the socio-economic ladder. Supplementary measures will focus on increasing household food security and, hence, nutrition levels in order to reduce malnutrition among children in particular. Poor soil fertility, highly variable rainfall patterns and flooding – to mention but a few factors – pose further threats to household food security, especially in the northern communal areas. Since 64.3% of extremely poor households owned land or had access to land, improved agricultural productivity would benefit two thirds of the extremely poor households. The adoption of new farm management systems such as Conservation Agriculture has yielded very positive results in the northern communal areas as well as in neighbouring countries such as Malawi and Zambia. The promotion of such sys-tems will not only result in higher yields and increased food security, but can also lead to surplus production for the market.


Furthermore, the high rate of unemployment in rural areas – 65%, according to the 2008 Labour Force Survey – aggravates poverty since it reduces the opportu-nities to earn a cash income. On the other hand, increased agricultural produc-tivity in communal areas will have spin-offs in terms of job creation in agriculture -related services, agro-processing, transport services, etc. However, there is also a need for cash-for-work programmes to improve rural infrastructure so that investment in off-farm economic activities can be encouraged. The proportion of
extremely poor households was lowest amongst those that relied on salaries and wages (6.6%) and highest for those that were dependent on pensions (28.4%) and on subsistence farming (17.6%). Hence, increased job opportunities in rural areas – where most of the extremely poor reside – will contribute to a reduction in extreme poverty.


The poor are denied access to basic public services (>>). In general, access to such services in rural areas – again, where most of the poor reside – lags behind urban areas. The distance to schools and clinics is longer than distances in towns. This factor is often aggravated by inadequate road infrastructure and, in the case of health services, a lack of ambulances. Urban areas perform better in all health indicators compared to rural areas. The discrepancies are even more pronounced for water and sanitation. Some 11.9% of rural households rely on flowing or stagnant water sources, while 77.4% use buckets or the bush for sani-tation, compared with 0.2% and 13.9%, respectively, in respect of urban house-holds. More specifically, while 43% of all households had access to piped water, this was the case for only 18% of poor households. Furthermore, 83.4% of ex-tremely poor households relied on the bush as their main toilet facility, com-pared with 42.5% of non -poor households. These substandard water and sanita-tion facilities pose risks to children’s health in particular, and can have detri-mental impacts on the household’s productivity – and, in turn, on food security and children’s ability to learn.


Finally, not much is known about the causes of extreme poverty in Namibia. This hampers efforts to identify appropriate measures to address not just the symp-toms, but also the roots of poverty. It is necessary, therefore, to increase re-search on the issue and to strengthen research capacity, including gender analy - sis research, since women are affected by poverty to a greater extent than men.
Based on the above developments and challenges, Government aims to achieve the following desired outcome by 2017:By 2017, the proportion of severely poor individuals has dropped from 15.8% in 2009/10 to below 10%.

Poverty is a complex, multifaceted challenge that needs to be addressed from various angles, as explained earlier herein. A number of interventions that are needed to reduce extreme poverty and vulnerability are addressed in other Chapters of the NDP4. These include Chapter 6 on education and skills (access to quality education, the school feeding programme to reduce malnutrition in children), Chapter 7 on health (increase access to quality health services, address malnutrition), Chapter 9 on infrastructure development (provide affordable in-frastructure in order to attract non-farm income generating activities to rural areas, create jobs and income and improve access to quality public services), and Chapter 13 on agriculture (increase household food security). However, cash transfers have proved a successful tool in Namibia and elsewhere in addressing poverty and, hence, receive special attention in this Chapter.
Strengthen and expand the social protection system

A regular, secure cash income allows people to invest in business and farming activities; buy additional food if they need it; buy decent clothes; pay for transport to health, education and other service facilities; and participate in so-cial events. Government will, therefore, expand the social protection system to households that are currently excluded but are severely affected by poverty. These include households with children who, although not orphaned, live in ex-treme poverty or households of certain language groups prone to extreme pov-erty. Furthermore, Government will increase the effectiveness of the social pro-tection system by reviewing and simplifying bureaucratic procedures, including means testing and introducing the Kinship Grant in order to streamline the social protection system. In addition, Government will expedite civil registration in or-der to reduce access barriers to social grants. Moreover, Government will not only maintain but also improve grant recipients’ current standard of living through adequate, regular increases of grant amounts, e.g. through a salary-increment-index system.


Increase household food security

Malnutrition severely affects children’s capacity to learn. This in turn affects their educational prowess and, consequently, their future choices in life and their vulnerability to external shocks. It also affects the productivity of the popu-lation of working age. One means of increasing household food security is by way of cash transfers. However, since subsistence farmers are more affected by extreme poverty than the population in general are, Government will supple-ment cash transfers with interventions such as the promotion of Conservation Agriculture in order to increase subsistence farmers’ productivity and reduce their vulnerability to climatic conditions.


Increase research into the root causes of extreme poverty

Government will increase research into the causes of extreme poverty in order to address the causes rather than the symptoms.


Table 25 (page 68) depicts the challenges, implications thereof, and proposed response to reduce extreme poverty.


*****

5 Public infrastructure

Modern, reliable infrastructure is critical for high and sustained economic growth. Without such infrastructure, almost everything in the economic value chain tends to be slower, less reliable, and more expensive than necessary. The latter aspect is equally true for both physical infrastructure and knowledge infra-structure delivered via ICT. According to the African Development Bank, shortag-es in physical infrastructure like roads, housing, water, sanitation and electricity reduce sub-Saharan Africa’s output by up to 40%. According to the OECD, the World Bank, International Telecommunication Union, and international players in the ICT sphere, ICT today is vital for quality of civic life. ICT offers the potential to transform society, improve our mutual understanding, and eliminate power differentials. Research has also shown that Internet use is closely linked to edu-cation. ICT provides fast access to information which is a prerequisite for literacy and knowledge creation. The technologies are the mode of delivery for infor-mation to flow.


Namibia has a relatively good core network of national physical infrastructure, including transport infrastructure, electricity distribution lines, dams, telecom-munications and mobile communication infrastructure. However, there are emerging weaknesses which, if not addressed over the next five years, could be-come serious obstacles to higher economic growth.


Current investment levels are insufficient to support higher economic growth, and maintenance programmes, especially in the transport sector, are seriously lagging behind. In December 2011, the effects of underinvestment in the rail sys-tem came to the fore when TransNamib experienced a number of derailments that not only affected industries, but also posed safety and security concerns. In the ICT sector, large parts of the country are still without telecommunication transmission lines. De facto, this means that we still exclude those communities from vital information.


If we do not increase investment in our infrastructure, industries across the board will be affected, including the nascent transport and logistics sector, the manufacturing sector, the agricultural sector, the mineral sector, and the tour-ism and hospitality sector – all of which have high potential for economic growth and job creation. In all of these sectors, ICT plays a decisive role. Today, competi-tiveness is not only measured by price structures but by who is able to deliver goods and services on time. Where it was acceptable before to respond to a trade request after some days, trade requests now need to be answered within hours. Such efficient response times can only be delivered via electronic data and information transfer. If, for example, information on job opportunities in a certain sector cannot flow due to a lack of Internet access, economic inequality will ensue. Providing access to information in rural areas is a specific test of our commitment to establish equitable economic growth throughout Namibia.

To fix all economic infrastructures at once would be very expensive and, there-fore, not feasible. Therefore, over the next five years, the focus will be on in-vesting in strategic infrastructure, i.e. in programmes and projects that involve creating a long-term economic benefit to the country, equal to or greater than the initial and continued investment required in such infrastructure. Moreover, these investments should be linked to the kind of economic structure for the knowledge-based society envisaged by Vision 2030.


An additional challenge will be to maintain or upgrade existing infrastructure, use it optimally, and extend it effectively and efficiently, in line with the de-mands of the economy. Large investments will be needed to safeguard and pro-pel economic activity, and significant trade-offs will have to be made with re-spect not only to specific types of economic infrastructure, but also in general. Therefore, we need to be more innovative in the funding mix of our public in-vestments, including making greater use of PPP financing mechanisms, and with respect to the kind of infrastructure we provide, e.g. electricity connections off or via the national grid.


The innovation required of us will test our ability to make more with less. Espe-cially in the infrastructure sector, leapfrog options can be considered. Namibia can learn from developed countries in this regard: technologies considered to be redundant or outdated in developed countries should not be marketed in Na-mibia. Indeed, ICT provides good reason for innovation: ICT in general tends to be associated with improvements in products and productivity. Exploitation of the latest technologies may, therefore, give our target industries a competitive advantage.

Table 27 indicates the targets and out-turns of NDP3 for the infrastructure sub sector.
In view of our ambition to become a logistics and distribution hub by 2030, ex-tensive investment will have to be made in all four modes of transport infra-structure, namely road, rail, maritime and aviation.


With respect to road infrastructure, Namibia has a number of high-quality roads
– known as corridors – that link the Port of Walvis Bay with rapidly developing landlocked countries neighbouring Namibia, as well as with Angola and South Africa. To unlock the full potential of economic corridors, new roads need to be built and others upgraded to bitumen standard to ensure efficient flow of goods. Increased volumes through corridor traffic are starting to put pressure on the country’s road network, impacting in the life expectancy of roads, road users’ safety, and increased maintenance costs. These roads will have to be maintained if the free flow of goods to neighbouring countries is to be sustained. A key stra-tegic focus under the NDP4, therefore, will be to strike the appropriate balance regarding the mix of maintenance versus further expansion with regard to road infrastructure.


Certain sections of the rail infrastructure need urgent replacement. Indeed, cer-tain major shipping lines have indicated that a functioning rail system would be a precondition for them to stop at the Port of Walvis Bay. However, only 46% of Namibia’s rail network complies with the SADC recommendations concerning axle load. Only 1,203 km of the total rail network of 2,626 km can carry the standard 18.5-t axle load, whilst the remaining lines are limited to 16.5 t or even only 13.5 t. Thus, certain sections of the current core rail network will have to be upgraded as soon as possible. At the top of the list is the Kranzberg–Tsumeb connection, for which Government has already committed funding. A strategic decision will also have to be taken shortly as regards the type of rail system Na-mibia should put in place in order to promote the country as a logistics nation and make rail transport competitive with road transport, thereby reducing the pressure on and the costs of maintaining roads.
Regarding maritime infrastructure, the Port of Walvis Bay is already practically running at full capacity. Namport’s expansion plans enjoy full Government sup-port, but project implementation is slow due to the tendering process. If it is not expanded as soon as possible, the port will become congested, eroding one of Namibia’s key pillars of competitiveness in maritime transport, namely a quick turnaround time.


As with other modes of transport in Namibia, the aviation industry has also suffered from underinvestment in aviation infrastructure. Initial investment needs to focus on security-related infrastructure in order to ensure that our im-age as a safe flight destination remains untarnished.


Namibia’s total electric power demand is in the region of 540 MW. Total produc-tion capacity delivers only 400 MW, however, rendering a deficit of 140 MW. In reality, the deficit is much higher, as supply from Ruacana is dependent on the seasonal flow of the Kunene River.


Currently, Namibia imports the bulk of its electricity from Eskom in South Africa. However, Eskom has its own challenges in providing electricity to that country. Availability of sufficient and affordable energy could become a bottleneck for rapid economic development during the NDP4 period, as the entire subregion is expected to suffer from serious power deficits. A shortage of electricity will im-pact negatively across all sorts of industries.


NamPower has a number of projects in the pipeline, with two options in an ad-vanced stage, namely construction of a gas-fired power station supplied by the natural Kudu gas reserve, or the construction of a coal-fired power station with imported coal. In addition, a number of other energy sources including hydro and other renewable energy sources will continue to enjoy attention in Namib-ia’s energy mix. However, building new electricity-generation capacity is time-consuming and does not address the immediate supply constraints. It will be necessary, therefore, to continue addressing the demand side by promoting electricity-saving technologies and offering energy audits to industry and house-holds.


In addition to improving access to electricity for heating and lighting, the accessi-bility of rural areas to the Internet via power line telephony (PLT), power line communication (PLC) and satellite communications offers new possibilities of universal access to information. Thus, a lack of telephone lines will not limit such access. Furthermore, lower access prices are required to bridge the ICT divide – certainly something the Regional Electricity Distribution (RED) companies and NamPower could strive to achieve during the NDP4 period.

By 2017, Namibia will have in place adequate base load energy to support industry development through construction of energy infrastructure and the production capacity would have expanded from 400 to more than 750 mega watts to meet demand.
Currently, over 85.5% of all Namibians have access to potable or safe water: a significant achievement. However, the limited availability of bulk water could become a key constraint – if it is not already so, especially for mining develop-ments at the coast. The fishing industry, too, may be affected to some extent.


Availability of water is a concern not only for industry, but also, increasingly, for human consumption: a number of water reservoirs around the country are run-ning low, while dependency on water supply via other countries is not sustaina-ble. Cabinet therefore issued a directive to the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry to ensure security of water.


There are a number of options on how to address the water constraint, but the most important ones include desalination, aquifer recharge, the recycling and reuse of water in industries, and the construction of large dams. Such dams are also important for irrigation and the Green Scheme development. As with elec-tricity, it is possible to address the demand side through water-saving technolo-gies in industries and households, e.g. by using dry rather than flush toilet sys-tems in rural areas.

By 2017, increased access to water for human consumption from 85.5% to 100% of the population as well as sufficient water reserves for industriali-sation.

Housing is another area where Namibia is found to be wanting. The majority of households in Namibia, especially those with low income, do not have access to affordable housing. Over the years there has been an unsustainable increase in informal settlements in and around our towns and cities. If this challenge is not addressed head-on, the probable result is a colossal health hazard. Two of the key bottlenecks identified for the lack of houses in the low-income bracket are the shortage of serviced land and the deficiency of appropriate funding mecha-nisms.

Due to the high demand for houses and the lack of supply, house prices have skyrocketed. There is a need for the central Government to financially assist lo-cal authorities to increase the supply of serviced residential land as well as re-view the National Housing Policy, specifically with regard to the provision of funding for low-income housing. It is also important for us to review the distribu-tion methods used by local authorities to ensure that households in real need of housing enjoy priority.

By 2017, Namibia will have a robust and effective housing delivery pro-gramme where affordability is the key feature of the programme; and that 60 per cent of households will be living in modern houses from 41 per cent in 2009/2010.


Namibia has made tremendous progress in ICT development and rolling out new technologies, including internet technologies, since 2002. By 2012, for example, Namibia was able to boast a network coverage for mobile phones of close to 100% of the population: certainly no small achievement – taking into considera-tion the low population density and vast areas to be covered. The Government also recognises that the Internet is becoming a basic component of civic life, an aim for which Namibia needs to strive in respect of becoming a knowledge-based economy by 2030. Furthermore, ICT is important for social and economic mobility, increased democracy – especially that of democratising information, and economic growth. The development of information infrastructure and affordable access to it would be a shortcut to economic growth in Namibia. In general, ICT tends to be associated with improvements in product development and productivity. Thus, the exploitation of the latest technologies may give our target industries a competitive advantage. Production systems and skilled jobs in the NDP4’s target economic sectors are based on ICT. There is urgency, there-fore, in developing skilled jobs and engaging all Namibians to become technolog-ically ready. Competitiveness today is measured on our ability to adapt and inno-vate, not on the amount or price of mineral or other natural resources we are able to export.


By 2017, adequate ICT infrastructure will be in place to facilitate economic development and competitiveness through innovation, research and de-velopment: Availability of latest technologies score improves to 6.0 from 5.5.(according to the World Economic Forum).


In line with our desire to become a trade and logistics hub, taking the No. 1 spot as the most competitive tourist destination in sub-Saharan Africa, as well as our desire to increase the manufacturing sector’s contribution to GDP, the NDP4 will pursue the following high-level economic infrastructure strategies:

Ensure the timely expansion of the Port of Walvis Bay so that it remains the most efficient port along the west coast of Africa

Fix the core rail network and ensure compliance with SADC standards in order to transport goods safely and efficiently from the port to various destinations, and take pressure off the road network

Ensure an appropriate balance between the construction of new roads and the maintenance of existing ones, and ensure that such new roads are in alignment with national development objectives

Ensure aviation security and upgrade airport facilities to create synergies be-tween the maritime, road and rail transport of goods, and to be able to handle more traffic in line with increased tourist arrivals

Ensure that the country can deliver its own baseload power supply by investing in infrastructure that produces a desired energy mix, thereby addressing de-mand and ensuring that key industries have sufficient supply, while taking into account our objective to maintain a clean environment

Financially assist local authorities to increase the supply of serviced residential land as well as review the National Housing Policy.

Ensure water security for human consumption and industrial development though recharging strategic aquifers, recycling and reusing water and by other means, as well as addressing the demand side through water-saving technolo-gies

Ensure that we have access to affordable modern and reliable ICT infrastructure to promote business efficiency, and that there is deeper penetration of broad-band Internet in rural communities in order to minimise the digital divide and contribute toward unleashing the potential of rural development through en-hanced market intelligence, and

Put in place a funding mechanism, including a PPP framework, to ensure delivery of infrastructure while maintaining macroeconomic stability.












